An Explanation of the Essence of Dependent Arising Namaḥ Śākyamunaye. Of those phenomena that arise from causes, Those causes the Tathāgata taught, As well as their cessation. He who teaches thus-evaṃ-is the Great Recluse. The meaning of this stanza is the following. "The phenomena that arise from causes" indicates suffering. Their "causes" refers to origin, which includes afflictions and karma. These describe saṃsāra in terms of cause and result. That which eliminates them is the truth of the path, and their "cessation" is the truth of cessation. These two describe liberation in terms of cause and result. Thus, on the basis of the utterly pure nature of the mind, free of the four extremes, there occurs the illusion-like arising from the relationship of actions and their results. The only one who taught reality in this way-evaṃ-is the "Great Renunciate," no one else. As it is taught in the following verse: I pay homage to Munīndra, lord among sages, Unequaled and supreme, who taught That emptiness and dependent arising Are identical in meaning in the Middle Way. Since this point is the essence of all true Dharma, it is the essence of dependent arising. In the Stainless Light, it is stated that ye dharmāḥ precedes the eighty-four thousand Dharma teachings. The meaning of this is as follows. Śrāvaka disciples following the teachings of the first turning of the Dharma wheel know saṃsāra, characterized by the five skandhas of clinging, to be the truth of suffering, and its cause, which is the view of the perishing collection characterized by the belief in the self of the individual, to be the truth of origin. Having come to know this, they realize that for it to cease there are the practices of calm abiding to render the mind perfectly pliable, and special insight, consisting of the familiarization with the sixteen aspects of the four truths, comprising the truth of the path. Its result, which is nirvāṇa with and without remainder, is understood to be the truth of cessation. In addition to the above, pratyekabuddhas recognize that the principal origin is the belief in the true existence of the apprehended, and in addition to the aspects of the four truths, their truth of the path consists in meditating in particular on profound dependent arising. The trainees of the causal Mahāyāna who follow the teachings of the middle turning of the Dharma wheel maintain that formative factors are the principal suffering, and its cause, grasping at an inherent identity in phenomena, is the origin. For them, the truth of the path is training by means of the practice of the perfections based on bodhicitta, and the truth of cessation is non-abiding nirvāṇa. Those who are able to bear the Madhyamaka view through faith and conviction, yet lack the wisdom that cognizes the lack of inherent existence of all the means used to engage in the perfections, are called bodhisattvas with conceptualizations, or bodhisattvas of weaker faculties. Those who engage in the path while holding the view by means of the wisdom that cognizes the lack of inherent existence of all perfections are called bodhisattvas engaged in skillful means, or of sharp faculties. Due to diverse degrees of wisdom, the amount of time required for these two types of bodhisattvas to attain awakening can vary vastly. As Maitreya stated: Complete awakening is said to be realized with ease by those of sharp faculties, But it is difficult to attain for those of weaker acumen. For those who follow the teachings of the final turning of the Dharma wheel and rely on the vehicle of the essence that dwells in the tathāgatas' sphere of experience, the principal origin is comprised of the stains of discriminative consciousness covering buddha nature. For them, the suffering of conditioned existence that is projected by it refers to the fluctuating modalities of mind, which are the adventitious stains. The truth of the path consists of the four avenues of conviction in the cessation of these stains, wisdom, compassion, and samādhi; and the truth of cessation has the nature of the four perfections of purity, self, bliss, and permanence. In the outer tantras, the consciousness of the universal ground, the ground in which the karmic latencies are placed, is explained to be the principal origin, and suffering refers to the ordinary beings' three doors fabricated by it. Mantra, which transmutes this suffering into pristine wisdom and is preceded by empowerment, is the path. Nondual, uncompounded pristine wisdom is cessation. In his Commentary on the Higher States of Meditative Absorptions, Ācārya Buddhaguhya explains that the term "mantra" refers to awareness of the deity, of its signs, of its essence, and so forth. In the Unsurpassed Tantra class, saṃsāra is taught to be the non-recognition of natural, innate, and uncontrived pristine wisdom, while its cause, the karmic latencies of transference, is the principal origin. The truth of the path consists of not being distracted from the two stages of ripening and liberation, and the truth of cessation is the body endowed with the seven aspects of union. These are merely a few brief remarks. This subject should be learned extensively from the various collections of scriptures and the individual tantras. This was written down on the basis of the ocean of the scriptures and tantras as they were taught by all perfectly awakened buddhas. Sarva maṇgalam. 
